Basic Terminology and Operation
===============================

Exax is a user-space client-server application.  There is one server
per project using exax.  A project's source code is partitioned into
two types of files:

  - *build scripts*, controlling the high level execution flow of a project, and
  - *job scripts*, intended for core computations.

A project requires at least one build script and any number of job
scripts (including zero).

All code execution, be it build or job scripts, produces *jobs*, where
a job is basically a directory on disk containing a set of files
detailing all aspects of the execution of the script.  A job's files
are easily accessible from other scripts using Python objects, so that
they can be presented to the user or used as input to other scripts.




What is a Job?
--------------

A *job* is a directory that was created when a build or job script was
executed.  The directory contains a set of files containing input
parameters (including references to input data), source code, produced
output files, profiling information, and anything printed to standard
out and standard error during the execution.

Each job is associated with a unique identifier, such as for example
``dev-37``.  This called the *job id*, and the directory where the
information is stored is called the *job directory*.

Files and data in a job is typically accessed using Python objects and
convenience functions, so although the file structure is human
readable, there is little reason to know about the details of it.

Jobs and job ids are almost interchangeable.  ``Job('dev-37')`` is the
job object that corresponds to job id ``dev-37``.

What is a Build Script?
-----------------------

A build script is a Python file responsible for the top level
execution flow of a whole project or a subproject.  A project needs to
have at least one build script, but it is common to have separate
build scripts for testing and similar.

The main purpose of a build scripts is to execute job scripts and pass
data and parameters between them and the build script itself.  (In
theory, a project may do without any job scripts at all, but then many
advantages of exax will be lost.)



Execution of a build script *always* results in the creation of a job,
so it is always possible to go back and see what scripts that have
been executed in the past, as well as what input they used and what
output they generated.

.. note:: The naming of build script files is special.
	 A build script has to start with the prefix ``build_``.

	 For example, the build script ``myscript`` is stored in a
	 file named ``build_myscript.py``.

.. note:: The default build script is just ``build.py``.

All build scrips in a project can be listed using the ``ax script``
command, or be browsed in a web browser using the built in Board web
server.



What is a Job Script?
---------------------

A job script is a Python file that is executed by a build script, or
in some situations by another job script.  A project is typically
partitioned into several job scripts controlled by a top level build script.

The first time a certain job script is executed, exax creates a job
directory where it stores information throughout the script's
execution.  When execution finishes, exax will return a pointer to the
created job.

Conversely, if the job script has already been executed in the past,
using the same inputs and parameters, exax will *not* create a new job
directory.  Instead, the execution will immediately return a pointer
to this already existing job.

.. note:: A job script will never be executed more than once for a given
          set of inputs, parameters and source code.  Existing results
          will be re-used and not re-computed.

Job scripts can do simple, but very powerful, *parallel processing*.
Execution flow in a job script is controlled by a few pre-defined
functions.

.. tip:: A machine equipped with 64 core can do one CPU-core-hour of
   work in *less than one minute*, if workload is parallellised.  A
   more common of the shelf inexpensive eight-core CPU can do one CPU
   hour of work in just 7.5 minutes!

All job scripts in a project can be listed using the ``ax method``
command, or be browsed in a web browser using the built in Board web
server.



A Few More...
-------------

**What is a workdir?**

Job directories are stored in *workdirs*, which are just ordinary
directories.  For most project, one workdir is enough, but for example
in a collaborative environment it makes sense to have unique workdirs
for each user.  The name and location of the workdirs are defined in
the configuration file.

**What is a method package**

This is where build and job scripts are stored.  As the name
indicated, they are importable Python packages.

The standard job scripts bundled with exax are stored in another
package, and example files in yet another.  It is possible to define
any number of packages in the configuration file.

**What is the result directory**

This is where important results may be stored.  Defined in the configuration file

**What is the input directory**

This is a path to where the input data files are stored.  Defining
this in one place makes the path to the data relative, meaning that
data can be moved around in the file system without causing changes to
any job.  Defined in the configuration file
